# Classifying Reactions: Chemicals in Balance

Chemical reactions are taking place everywhere. The cellulose in the firewood reacts with the oxygen in the air, producing carbon dioxide and water. The light and heat of the campfire are evidence of the chemical reaction. If someone roasts a marshmallow its sugars react with oxygen. The soft, white marshmallow forms a brown and brittle crust. When someone eats a marshmallow, the chemicals in the stomach react with the sugar molecules to digest them. A person telling a story exhales carbon dioxide with every breath. Carbon dioxide is the product of respiration, another chemical reaction.

In each star in the night sky above, another type of reaction is taking place. This type of reaction is called a nuclear reaction, because it involves changes within the nucleus of the atom. Nuclear reactions are responsible for the enormous amounts of heat and light generated by all the stars, including our Sun.

Chemical reactions are everywhere in our daily lives. We rely on chemical reactions for everything from powering a car to making toast.

## Chemical Equations

Interactions where elements and compounds interact with one another to form new substances are called chemical reactions. A substance that undergoes a chemical reaction is called a reactant. A substance that is formed in a chemical reaction is called a product.

For example, when the glucose in a marshmallow reacts with oxygen in the air to form water and carbon dioxide, the glucose and oxygen are the reactants. The carbon dioxide and water are the products. Chemists use chemical equations to communicate what is occurring in a chemical reaction. Chemical equations come in several forms. All of these forms condense a great deal of chemical information into a short statement.

### Word Equations

A word equation identifies the reactants and products of a chemical reaction by name. For example, chlorine and sodium combine to form the ionic compound sodium chloride. This reaction can be represented by the following word equation:

$$
\mathrm {s o d i u m} + \text {c h l o r i n e} \rightarrow \text {s o d i u m c h l o r i d e}
$$

In this equation, “+” means “reacts with” and “ $\rightarrow$ ” means “to form.”

Caffeine's chemical name is 1,3,7-trimethylxanthene.

Word equations are useful because they identify the products and reactants in a chemical reaction. They do not, however, provide any chemical information about the compounds and elements themselves. Another shortcoming of a word equation is that the names for chemicals are often very long and cumbersome. Chemists have therefore devised a more convenient way of representing reactants and products.

### Skeleton Equations

Using a chemical formula instead of a chemical name simplifies a chemical equation. It allows you to see at a glance what elements and compounds are involved in the reaction. A skeleton equation lists the chemical formula of each reactant on the left, separated by a + sign if more than one reactant is involved, followed by an arrow  $\rightarrow$ . The chemical formula of each product is listed on the right, again separated by a + sign if more than one product is produced. A skeleton equation also shows the state of each reactant by using the appropriate subscript, as shown in Table 4.1.

The reaction of sodium metal with chlorine gas to form sodium chloride can be represented by the following skeleton equation:

$$
\mathrm {N a} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {C l} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} \rightarrow \mathrm {N a C l} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)}
$$

A skeleton equation is more useful to a chemist than a word equation, because it shows the formulas of the compounds involved. It also shows the state of each substance.

### Why Skeleton Equations Are Incomplete

Although skeleton equations are useful, they do not fully describe chemical reactions. For example, the skeleton equation showing the formation of sodium chloride: one sodium atom reacts with one chlorine molecule containing two chlorine atoms. The product is one formula unit of sodium chloride, containing one atom of sodium and one atom of chlorine. This leaves an extra chlorine atom unaccounted for.

### The Law of Conservation of Mass

All atoms must be accounted for, according to an important law. The law of conservation of mass states that in any chemical reaction, the mass of the products is always equal to the mass of the reactants. In other words, according to this law, matter can be neither created nor destroyed. Chemical reactions proceed according to the law of conservation of mass, which is based on experimental evidence.

Table 4.1 Symbols
Used in Chemical Equations

| Symbol | Meaning                  |
| :----- | :----------------------- |
| +      | reacts with (reactant side) |
| +      | and (product side)       |
| →      | to form                  |
| (s)    | solid or precipitate     |
| (ℓ)    | liquid                   |
| (g)    | gas                      |
| (aq)   | in aqueous (water) solution |

Many chemical reactions can go in either direction, so an arrow pointing in the opposite direction is often added to the equation. This can look like  $\rightleftarrows$  or  $\rightleftharpoons$ . To indicate which reaction is more likely to occur, one arrow can be drawn longer than the other: for example:  $\rightleftarrows$  or  $\rightleftarrows$ .

### Balanced Chemical Equations

A balanced chemical equation reflects the law of conservation of mass. This type of equation shows that there is the same number of each kind of atom on both sides of the equation. Some skeleton equations are, by coincidence, already balanced. For example, the reaction of carbon with oxygen to form carbon dioxide: one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are on the left side of the equation, and one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms are on the right side of the equation.

Most skeleton equations, however, are not balanced, such as the one showing the formation of sodium chloride. There is one sodium atom on each side of the equation, but there are two chlorine atoms on the left side and only one chlorine atom on the right side.

To begin to balance an equation, you can add numbers in front of the appropriate formulas. The numbers that are placed in front of chemical formulas are called coefficients. They represent how many of each atom, molecule, or formula unit take part in each reaction. For example, if you add a coefficient of 2 to NaCl in the equation, you indicate that two formula units of NaCl are produced in the reaction.

You cannot balance an equation by changing any of the chemical formulas. The only way to balance a chemical equation is to put the appropriate numerical coefficient in front of each compound or element in the equation.

### Steps for Balancing Chemical Equations

More complex chemical equations can be balanced by using a combination of inspection and trial and error. Here, however, are some steps to follow.

Step 1 Write out the skeleton equation. Ensure that you have copied all the chemical formulas correctly.
Step 2 Begin by balancing the atoms that occur in the largest number on either side of the equation. Leave hydrogen, oxygen, and other elements until later.
Step 3 Balance any polyatomic ions, such as sulfate,  $\mathrm{SO}_4^{2-}$ , that occur on both sides of the chemical equation as an ion unit. That is, do not split a sulfate ion into 1 sulfur atom and 4 oxygen atoms. Balance this ion as one unit.
Step 4 Next, balance any hydrogen or oxygen atoms that occur in a combined and uncombined state. For example, combined oxygen might be in the form of  $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ , while uncombined oxygen occurs as  $\mathrm{O}_{2}$ .
Step 5 Finally, balance any other element that occurs in its uncombined state: for example, Na or  $\mathrm{Cl}_2$ .
Step 6 Check your answer. Count the number of each type of atom on each side of the equation. Make sure that the coefficients used are whole numbers in their lowest terms.

### Sample Problem

**Balancing Chemical Equations**

**Problem**
Copper(II) nitrate reacts with potassium hydroxide to form potassium nitrate and solid copper(II) hydroxide.

Balance the equation.

$$
\mathrm {C u} \left(\mathrm {N O} _ {3}\right) _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {K O H} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow \mathrm {C u} (\mathrm {O H}) _ {2 (\mathrm {s})} + \mathrm {K N O} _ {3 (\mathrm {a q})}
$$

**What Is Required?**
The atoms of each element on the left side of the equation should equal the atoms of each element on the right side of the equation.

**Plan Your Strategy**
Balance the polyatomic ions first  $(\mathrm{NO}_3^-,$  then  $\mathrm{OH}^-$ ). Check to see whether the equation is balanced. If not, balance the potassium and copper ions. Check your equation again.

**Act on Your Strategy**
There are two  $\mathrm{NO}_3^-$  ions on the left, so put a 2 in front of  $\mathrm{KNO}_3$ .

$$
\mathrm {C u} \left(\mathrm {N O} _ {3}\right) _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {K O H} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow \mathrm {C u} (\mathrm {O H}) _ {2 (\mathrm {s})} + 2 \mathrm {K N O} _ {3 (\mathrm {a q})}
$$

To balance the two  $\mathrm{OH}^-$  ions on the right, put a 2 in front of the KOH.

$$
\mathrm {C u} \left(\mathrm {N O} _ {3}\right) _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} + 2 \mathrm {K O H} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow \mathrm {C u} (\mathrm {O H}) _ {2 (\mathrm {s})} + 2 \mathrm {K N O} _ {3 (\mathrm {a q})}
$$

Check to see that the copper and potassium ions are balanced. They are, so the equation above is balanced.

**Check Your Solution**
Tally the number of each type of atom on each side of the equation.

$$
\mathrm {C u} \left(\mathrm {N O} _ {3}\right) _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} + 2 \mathrm {K O H} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow \mathrm {C u} (\mathrm {O H}) _ {2 (\mathrm {s})} + 2 \mathrm {K N O} _ {3 (\mathrm {a q})}
$$

**Left Side**
Cu 1
NO3 2
K 2
OH- 2

**Right Side**
Cu 1
NO3 2
K 2
OH- 2

The fraction  $\frac{5}{10}$ , expressed in lowest terms, is  $\frac{1}{2}$ . Similarly, the equation  $4\mathrm{H}_{2(\mathrm{g})} + 2\mathrm{O}_{2(\mathrm{g})} \rightarrow 4\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}_{(\ell)}$  is balanced, but it can be simplified by dividing all the coefficients by two.  $2\mathrm{H}_{2(\mathrm{g})} + \mathrm{O}_{2(\mathrm{g})} \rightarrow 2\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}_{(\ell)}$ .

## Synthesis and Decomposition Reactions

Just as there are different types of compounds, there are different types of chemical reactions. By classifying, one can recognize similarities between chemical reactions and the types of reactants that tend to undergo different types of reactions. With this knowledge, one can predict what will happen when one, two, or more substances react.

### Synthesis Reactions

In a synthesis reaction, two or more elements or compounds combine to form a new substance. Synthesis reactions are also known as combination or formation reactions. A general equation for a synthesis reaction is

$$
\mathrm {A} + \mathrm {B} \rightarrow \mathrm {C}
$$

In a simple synthesis reaction, one element reacts with one or more other elements to form a compound. Two, three, four, or more elements may react to form a single product, although synthesis reactions involving four or more reactants are extremely rare. When two elements react together, the reaction is almost always a synthesis reaction because the product is almost always a single compound. There are several types of synthesis reactions. Recognizing the patterns of the various types of reactions will help you to predict whether substances will take part in a synthesis reaction.

When a metal or a non-metal element reacts with oxygen, the product is an oxide. For example, iron reacts with oxygen according to the following equation:

$$
3 \mathrm {F e} _ {\mathrm {(s)}} + \mathrm {O} _ {2 \mathrm {(g)}} \rightarrow \mathrm {F e} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {3 \mathrm {(s)}}
$$

Two other examples of this type of reaction are:

$$
2 \mathrm {H} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} + \mathrm {O} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {(\mathrm {g})}
$$

$$
2 \mathrm {M g} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {O} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {M g O} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)}
$$

A second type of synthesis reaction involves the reaction of a metal and a non-metal to form a binary compound. One example is the reaction of potassium with chlorine.

$$
2 \mathrm {K} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {C l} _ {2 \left(\mathrm {g}\right)} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {K C l} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)}
$$

### Synthesis Reactions Involving Compounds

There are many synthesis reactions in which one or more compounds are the reactants. For the purpose of this course, however, we will deal only with the two specific types of synthesis reactions involving compounds that you should recognize: oxides and water.

When a non-metallic oxide reacts with water, the product is an acid. The acids that form when non-metallic oxides and water react are composed of hydrogen cations and polyatomic anions containing oxygen and a non-metal. For example, one contributor to acid rain is hydrogen sulfate (sulfuric acid),  $\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{SO}_4$ , which forms when sulfur trioxide reacts with water.

$$
\mathrm {S O} _ {3 (\mathrm {g})} + \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {(\ell)} \rightarrow \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {S O} _ {4 (\mathrm {a q})}
$$

Conversely, when a metallic oxide reacts with water, the product is a metal hydroxide. Metal hydroxides belong to a group of compounds called bases. For example, when calcium oxide reacts with water, it forms calcium hydroxide,  $\mathrm{Ca(OH)_2}$ . Calcium oxide is also called lime. It can be added to lakes to counteract the effects of acid precipitation.

$$
\mathrm {C a O} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {\left(\ell\right)} \rightarrow \mathrm {C a} (\mathrm {O H}) _ {2 \left(\mathrm {a q}\right)}
$$

Sometimes it is difficult to predict the product of a synthesis reaction. The only way to really know the product of a reaction is to carry out the reaction and then isolate and identify the product. For example, carbon can react with oxygen to form either carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide. Therefore, if all you know is that your reactants are carbon and oxygen, you cannot predict with certainty which compound will form. You can only give options.

$$
\mathrm {C} _ {\mathrm {(s)}} + \mathrm {O} _ {2 \mathrm {(g)}} \rightarrow \mathrm {C O} _ {2 \mathrm {(g)}}
$$

$$
2 \mathrm {C} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {O} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {C O} _ {\left(\mathrm {g}\right)}
$$

You would need to analyze the products of the reaction by experiment to determine which compound was formed.

### Decomposition Reactions

In a decomposition reaction, a compound breaks down into elements or other compounds. Therefore, a decomposition reaction is the opposite of a synthesis reaction. A general formula for a decomposition reaction is:

$$
\mathrm {C} \rightarrow \mathrm {A} + \mathrm {B}
$$

The substances that are produced in a decomposition reaction can be elements or compounds. In the simplest type of decomposition reaction, a compound breaks down into its component elements. One example is the decomposition of water into hydrogen and oxygen. This reaction occurs when electricity is passed through water.

$$
2 \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {O} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {H} _ {2} + \mathrm {O} _ {2}
$$

More complex decomposition reactions occur when compounds break down into other compounds. An example of this type of reaction is the explosive decomposition of ammonium nitrate.

When ammonium nitrate is heated to a high temperature, it forms dinitrogen monoxide and water according to the following balanced equation:

$$
\mathrm {N H} _ {4} \mathrm {N O} _ {3 (\mathrm {s})} \rightarrow \mathrm {N} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {(\mathrm {g})} + 2 \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {(\mathrm {g})}
$$

### Combustion Reactions

A complete combustion reaction is the reaction of a compound or element with  $\mathrm{O}_2$  to form the most common oxides of the elements that make up the compound. For example, a carbon-containing compound undergoes combustion to form carbon dioxide,  $\mathrm{CO}_2$ . A sulfur-containing compound reacts with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide,  $\mathrm{SO}_2$ .

Combustion reactions are usually accompanied by the production of light and heat. In the case of carbon-containing compounds, complete combustion results in the formation of, among other things, carbon dioxide. For example, methane,  $\mathrm{CH}_4$ , the primary constituent of natural gas, undergoes complete combustion to form carbon dioxide, (the most common oxide of carbon), as well as water. This combustion reaction is represented by the following equation:

$$
\mathrm {C H} _ {4 (\mathrm {g})} + 2 \mathrm {O} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} \rightarrow \mathrm {C O} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} + 2 \mathrm {H} _ {2} \mathrm {O} _ {(\mathrm {g})}
$$

The complete combustion of any compound that contains carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen (such as ethanol,  $\mathrm{C_2H_5OH}$ ) produces carbon dioxide and water.

Compounds that contain elements other than carbon also undergo complete combustion to form stable oxides. For instance, sulfur-containing compounds undergo combustion to form sulfur dioxide,  $\mathrm{SO}_2$ , a precursor to acid rain. Complete combustion reactions are often also synthesis reactions. Metals, such as magnesium, undergo combustion to form their most stable oxide.

$$
2 \mathrm {M g} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {O} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {M g O} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)}
$$

In the absence of sufficient oxygen, carbon-containing compounds undergo incomplete combustion, leading to the formation of carbon monoxide, CO, and water. Carbon monoxide is a deadly gas.

## Single Displacement and Double Displacement Reactions

### Single Displacement Reactions

In a single displacement reaction, one element in a compound is displaced (or replaced) by another element. Two general reactions represent two different types of single displacement reactions. One type involves a metal replacing a metal cation in a compound, as follows:

$$
\mathrm {A} + \mathrm {B C} \rightarrow \mathrm {A C} + \mathrm {B}
$$

For example,  $\mathrm{Zn}_{(\mathrm{s})} + \mathrm{Fe}(\mathrm{NO}_3)_{2(\mathrm{aq})}\rightarrow \mathrm{Zn}(\mathrm{NO}_3)_{2(\mathrm{aq})} + \mathrm{Fe}_{2(\mathrm{s})}$

The second type of single displacement reaction involves a non-metal (usually a halogen) replacing an anion in a compound, as follows:

$$
\mathrm {D E} + \mathrm {F} \rightarrow \mathrm {D F} + \mathrm {E}
$$

For example,  $\mathrm{Cl}_{2(\mathrm{g})} + \mathrm{CaBr}_{2(\mathrm{aq})} \rightarrow \mathrm{CaCl}_{2(\mathrm{aq})} + \mathrm{Br}_{2(\ell)}$

### Single Displacement Reactions and the Metal Activity Series

Most single displacement reactions involve one metal displacing another metal from a compound. In the following equation, magnesium metal replaces the zinc in  $\mathrm{ZnCl}_2$ , thereby liberating zinc as the free metal.

$$
\mathrm {M g} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {Z n C l} _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow \mathrm {M g C l} _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {Z n} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)}
$$

The following three reactions illustrate the various types of single displacement reactions involving metals:

1.  $\mathrm{Cu}_{(\mathrm{s})} + 2\mathrm{AgNO}_{3(\mathrm{aq})}\rightarrow \mathrm{Cu(NO_3)_2(aq)} + 2\mathrm{Ag(s)}$
    In this reaction, one metal replaces another metal in an ionic compound. That is, copper replaces silver in  $\mathrm{AgNO_3}$ . Because of the  $+2$  charge on the copper ion, it requires two nitrate ions to balance its charge.
2.  $\mathrm{Mg}_{(\mathrm{s})} + 2\mathrm{HCl}_{(\mathrm{aq})}\rightarrow \mathrm{MgCl}_{2(\mathrm{aq})} + \mathrm{H}_{2(\mathrm{g})}$
    In this reaction, magnesium metal replaces hydrogen from hydrochloric acid,  $\mathrm{HCl}_{\mathrm{(aq)}}$ . Since hydrogen is diatomic, it is "liberated" in the form of  $\mathrm{H}_2$ . This reaction is similar to reaction 1 if
    *   you treat hydrochloric acid as an ionic compound (which it technically is not), and if
    *   you treat hydrogen as a metal (also, technically, not the case).
3.  $2\mathrm{Na}_{(\mathrm{s})} + 2\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}_{(\ell)} \rightarrow 2\mathrm{NaOH}_{(\mathrm{aq})} + \mathrm{H}_{2(\mathrm{g})}$
    Sodium metal displaces hydrogen from water in this reaction. Again, since hydrogen is diatomic, it is produced as  $\mathrm{H}_{2}$ . As above, you can understand this reaction better if
    *   you treat hydrogen as a metal, and if
    *   you treat water as an ionic compound,  $\mathrm{H}^{+}(\mathrm{OH}^{-})$ .

All of the reactions just described follow the original general example of a single displacement reaction:

$$
\mathrm {A} + \mathrm {B C} \rightarrow \mathrm {A C} + \mathrm {B}
$$

When analyzing single displacement reactions, use the following guidelines:

*   Treat hydrogen as a metal.
*   Treat acids, such as HCl, as ionic compounds of the form  $\mathrm{H}^{+}\mathrm{Cl}^{-}$ . (Treat sulfuric acid,  $\mathrm{H}_{2}\mathrm{SO}_{4}$ , as  $\mathrm{H}^{+}\mathrm{H}^{+}\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ ).
*   Treat water as ionic, with the formula  $\mathrm{H}^{+}(\mathrm{OH}^{-})$ .

A single displacement reaction always favours the production of the less reactive metal. In other words, the "free" metal that is formed from the compound must always be less reactive than the metal that displaced it. For example,

$$
\begin{array}{l} 2 \mathrm {A g N O} _ {3 (\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {C u} _ {(\mathrm {s})} \rightarrow \\ \mathrm {C u} \left(\mathrm {N O} _ {3}\right) _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})} + 2 \mathrm {A g} (\mathrm {s}) \\ \end{array}
$$

Silver metal is more stable than copper metal. In other words, silver is below copper in the activity series.

### The Metal Activity Series

As you can see in Table 4.2, the more reactive metals are at the top of the activity series. The less reactive metals are at the bottom. A reactive metal will displace or replace any metal in a compound that is below it in the activity series. Metals from lithium to sodium will displace hydrogen as a gas from water. Metals from magnesium to lead will displace hydrogen as a gas only from acids. Copper, mercury, silver, and gold will not displace hydrogen from acids.

Table 4.2 Activity Series of Metals

| Metal      | Displaces hydrogen from acids | Displaces hydrogen from cold water |             |
| :--------- | :---------------------------- | :--------------------------------- | :---------- |
| lithium    |                               |                                    | Most Reactive |
| potassium  |                               |                                    |             |
| barium     |                               |                                    |             |
| calcium    |                               |                                    |             |
| sodium     |                               |                                    |             |
| magnesium  |                               |                                    |             |
| aluminum   |                               |                                    |             |
| zinc       |                               |                                    |             |
| chromium   |                               |                                    |             |
| iron       |                               |                                    |             |
| cadmium    |                               |                                    |             |
| cobalt     |                               |                                    |             |
| nickel     |                               |                                    |             |
| tin        |                               |                                    |             |
| lead       |                               |                                    |             |
| hydrogen   |                               |                                    |             |
| copper     |                               |                                    |             |
| mercury    |                               |                                    |             |
| silver     |                               |                                    |             |
| platinum   |                               |                                    |             |
| gold       |                               |                                    | Least Reactive |

Most metals that we use in everyday life are actually alloys. An alloy is a solid solution of one metal (or nonmetal) in another metal. For example, steel is an alloy of iron. Steel has many uses, from construction to the automobile industry. If the iron were not alloyed with other elements, it would not have the physical and chemical properties required, such as hardness and corrosion resistance.

You can use the activity series to help you predict the products of the reaction of a metal and a metal-containing compound. For example, consider the following incomplete equation.

$$
\mathrm {F e} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {C u S O} _ {4 (\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow
$$

You can see from the activity series that iron is above copper. This means that iron is more reactive than copper. This reaction will proceed.

$$
\mathrm {F e} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {C u S O} _ {4 (\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow \mathrm {F e S O} _ {4 (\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {C u} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)}
$$

The copper metal produced is less reactive than iron metal. What about the following incomplete reaction between silver and calcium chloride?

$$
\mathrm {A g} _ {\left(\mathrm {s}\right)} + \mathrm {C a C l} _ {2 \left(\mathrm {a q}\right)} \rightarrow
$$

Silver is below calcium in the activity series, meaning that it is less reactive. There would be no reaction between these two substances.

### Single Displacement Reactions Involving Halogens

Non-metals, typically halogens, can also take part in single displacement reactions. For example, molecular chlorine can replace bromine from KBr, an ionic compound, producing bromine and potassium chloride.

$$
\mathrm {C l} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} + 2 \mathrm {K B r} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {K C l} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {B r} _ {2 (\ell)}
$$

The activity series for halogens directly mirrors the position of halogens in the periodic table. It can be shown simply in the following way. Fluorine is the most reactive, and iodine is the least reactive.

$$
\mathrm {F} > \mathrm {C l} > \mathrm {B r} > \mathrm {I}
$$

In the same way as you used the activity series for metals, you can use the activity series for halogens to predict whether substances will undergo a single displacement reaction. For example, fluorine is above chlorine in the activity series. So, given the reactants fluorine and sodium chloride, you can predict that the following reaction will occur:

$$
\mathrm {F} _ {2 (\mathrm {g})} + 2 \mathrm {N a C l} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} \rightarrow 2 \mathrm {N a F} _ {(\mathrm {a q})} + \mathrm {C l} _ {2 (\mathrm {a q})}
$$

On the other hand, iodine is below bromine in the activity series. So, given the reactants